People ask me all the time, "How did you
land on variable resistance? Why did you
decide that's the best stimulus for
muscle growth?" The real answer is I
wasn't the one that determined that.
That was actually Louis Simmons. But
I'll I'll get to that in a minute
because my journey was a little
different.
[Music]
I didn't approach anything from a
strength and performance perspective.
Some of you probably most of you don't
know about my first invention which is
osteo strong. So osteiogenic loading as
I called it and that was the name of my
first book. It's about looking to
optimize loading through the muscular
skeletal system for the purposes of bone
density stimulation and growth. What's
osteogenic loading? It is the practice
of strategically loading bones on their
axis. So this is the axis of a bone. So
you don't want to load it this way. You
want to load it from end to end. So like
that. You want to get loading through
the bone that is more associated with
the loading we would see in high impact
type activity. Not weight training.
Because honestly, weight training, I
mean, I don't know if he still holds a
world record, but a good friend of mine,
Matt Wenning, 1,200 lb squat, 300 lb
super heavyweight powerlifter, held the
world record for a period of time.
That's not even enough load to stimulate
bone growth in your hip joint, cuz
that's four times body weight. And the
minimum dose response for growing bone
density is 4.2 multiples of body weight
in the hip joint. And that was um was a
study out of Bristol, United Kingdom
that determined that. But we all knew it
was associated with impact and and even
before that that research came out. I
wrote my book and and developed this
product before that research came out,
but we we just knew it was high. So to
get that high level of force, obviously
the m what the machine does is use
robotic arms to move the subject into a
position where they can get as much
force through the muscularkeeletal
system as possible. And so like in the
upper extremities, I'm going to have
120° angle of inclusion from my upper to
lower arm and the back of my hand in
line with the clavicle in this position.
And then I'm just going to extend the
arms. Now there's not actually a lot of
movement in this osteoggenic loading
process because what happens is you're
just you're compressing the bone the
radius the humorous clavicle all the
whole kinetic chain becomes compressed
and in that compression of bone you
stimulate the bone to grow. So I
developed this and it was already out in
the field and we did our first sort of
clinical examination collecting some
data in in the United Kingdom,
University of East London to be
specific. And the physicians at the
hospital, the Stratford Village Surgery,
they would ask is they wanted to use it.
They weren't test subjects, but they
were using it because they all had low
bone mass.
So, they were using it and they would
say, "Wow, like we're really dealing
with huge amounts of weight here,
right?" Because we're optimized like
like I said, now it's there's four
movements. I'm just doing the upper
extremities cuz it's easy to demo that
right here in front of you. What is most
profound is you're dealing with weights.
Even even the people who were in this
initial study, they were post-menopausal
females and they were getting like six,
seven, eight times body weight through
this process. It's just for a couple
seconds, but it's and and that's for the
lower extremities. They had incredible
results. So they they built more more
bone density than even the other
studies. Now they were really
compromised. So I think that's part of
the reason why they had such an
outrageous response.
But really compromised people are a
better reflection of the public than
healthy fit people because there's not a
lot of healthy fit people. So it was
probably a more accurate study. But when
going through this, the doctors that
were in the study were saying like how
does this loading compare with with what
people do in the gym? Of course, none of
these doctors had been in a gym in 20
years. So they they didn't have a good
perspective on what people lived. Now
fortunately I I went to the NAS database
and in the NAS database you can see what
and there's been many studies done using
the NAS database for determining what
sort of averages are what people do in a
fitness environment and what they really
saw was that typically people when
loading their lower extremities for the
purpose of strength exercise beginners
are at usually 1.3 three multiples of
body weight and advanced what they refer
to as advanced is in the top 1% were at
1.53
multiples of body weight through their
lower extremities. I know like everybody
who's a bodybuilder or a wannabe or
whatever is like, "Oh, that's bullshit."
Wait, okay, maybe it is for you. But
we're talking about regular people here,
not the outliers. So, like, I don't care
if you have a big squat. Good for you.
This is this is we're trying to help
humanity here. Uh, so I know it seems
low. That's just what people actually
do. probably part of the reason that
people don't really get results from
going to a gym and lifting standard
weights. When looking at that, I was
like, "Wow." Like we're right around
like there were people six, seven, eight
times body weight, whereas everybody
else is dealing with one or not even two
times their body weight. 1.53 was
considered the athletic or trained
person. So, like there's nothing you're
doing at a gym that's going to be
effective for bone density treatment
typically,
unless you're doing high impact. So,
like box jumps, jumping up doesn't do
anything for you. Jumping down can get
you that 4.2 multiples of body weight.
And as I began to understand this whole
dynamic, it's like, okay, wow, the human
body is capable of so much, but we
really don't do much with it because
that's not how weights work. And so I
thought because I'm having these
postmenopausal women doing this therapy
and they they started with two or three
times body weight on their first
session, which is a very significant
amount of load, but you're optimized in
that almost lock out position. That's
how you brace for impact. So we also
call this process impact emulation.
So they would go through this process
and they were growing bone. They were
growing bone like younger people grow
bone. Typically only younger people grow
bone and that's part of the reason why.
So this is a safe way to emulate high
impact. And as I saw what happened to
these people and how their bodies
changed and their health changed by
getting really high amounts of load, I
was like, "Wow,
weightlifting sucks."
Because we're not really accessing our
capability.
Like we're all a lot stronger than we
think we are, but we train full range
with a static weight. Now, training full
range is awesome. What I describe with
Osteo Strong is not training in full
range at all. It's very very limited
range, but it's for a very specific
purpose.
If you want to train a muscle and you
want want that muscle to grow, you need
to use as much range of motion as
possible without creating an injury. So,
the idea you want to go way back on the
bench press, you'll screw up your
shoulders doing that, but you want to
go, you know, whatever's comfortable to
the bottom. And then you want to go and
and you taking a more narrow grip
actually gives you more more range.
Bigger the range, the better. But that's
again for muscle growth. So basically I
I looked at what I learned with Osteong
and I'm like I wonder if just the entire
concept of weightlifting could be
challenged. Like I I don't think it
makes much sense anymore. That alerted
me I started doing some searching on
sports performance. It alerted me to
variable resistance and I found Louis
Simmons and Westside Barbell. And what I
realized very quickly was, wow, if those
guys knew what I was doing with the
extreme high weights, they would
probably be even more emboldened
to put more variance as opposed to
weight. When you look at what's going on
at Westside Barbell, one gym in
Columbus, Ohio, has broken more world
records out of that one gym, the
athletes that train at that one gym,
than any country on earth, including the
United States. So, it's probably the
greatest example of absolute sports
performance dominance. It would be like
if the Green Bay Packers won the Super
Bowl every other year. Like, I mean,
football wouldn't even be that
interesting. It's like, okay, who who's
they here from Westside? I guess they're
winning. That's how how that works. And
now Westside does most of the
instruction, training, and education for
the strength and conditioning coaches
for the NFL as well as a lot of the UFC
and a few other sports. I saw what they
were doing and they were they were
lifting weight, but then they would put
bands on the bar also. So sometimes half
of the weight would be banded and the
other half would be just static weight.
What I realized in that process is,
okay, you don't actually need the weight
as long as the bottom of the exercise,
the stretch position is loaded. If it's
not loaded, you're missing out on some
growth. But as long as you know there's
there's engagement back here, there's
engagement at the bottom of the squat,
you can go to fatigue there, especially
after you go to fatigue in the stronger
ranges of motion with really high
weights. So, like for example, when I do
a variable resistance chest press, I'm
holding 550 lbs at the top. And so, I
might hit that 20 times. That's an
incredible benefit for taking my
pectorals to exhaustion. Now, when I go
to fatigue here, and I can't get there
anymore, and now I just shorten the
range because it's a band that's being
stretched. So, if I stretch it less far,
it's giving me less weight. So now I can
still continue to work and do what's
called lengthened partials. And uh Milo
Wolf, Dr. Milo Wolf is probably the best
scientist on that subject. And he's been
studying this for a long time. And he's
established a lot of lots of benefit of
extra growth that you happen with doing
length and partials. It just so happens
that variable resistance is like born
for delivering that length and partial
benefit because as you go to fatigue,
you can deal with a slightly lower
amount of weight in a more lengthened
range, a more stretch range of motion
that's going to stimulate way more
growth.
So my whole journey went from developing
osteo strong and then really
understanding what Westside Barba and
Louis Simmons were doing and then just
running experiments with variable
resistance. Again, making sure the
bottom is loaded. You have to bottom of
the exercise always has to be loaded. I
say this over and over again. And then
some of the important research on the
subject, we have the Benjamin and
Ralph's study from 1996
showing that in an axial format, the
highest weight when when so the axis is
is this is when you can line the bones
up in one line or sort of cuz when you
perfectly line them up, you're actually
locked out. So you you do want to slight
keep the tension on the muscle. But
when the bones are loaded like this, the
tendons and ligaments become stronger.
That's a Benjamin and Ralph study. So
it's like I realized right away like the
body needs this. That's not at all like
we can't get to the right amount of load
to grow tendons and ligaments with
weights. I mean not if you're lifting
full range, not even close. Variable
resistance gives us that and then we can
get a massive stimulus without a whole
lot of risk because the riskiest part is
that stretch range of motion, but the
weight drops off and you're
pre-exhausted as you get into those
shorter repetitions that are just in
that range. So, the risk of injury is
very minimal and the exhaustion is so
profound, you will grow. And that's the
story of how I discovered
variable resistance, understood a little
bit more, and from a different
perspective, from a medical perspective,
I understood it. And that's all the
information that I applied when starting
with a clean sheet of paper and
developing X3. If this video helped you,
I want you to subscribe and follow. I'm
going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for you.